Your brain needs a LOT of energy to function.
Despite the fact that the average adult brain
is only about 2% of your total body mass,
it uses a full 20% of the energy you spend
while at rest.
To keep all your brain functions going, neurons
-- the cells that make up the brain -- have
to constantly be at the ready, and that’s
no easy task.
Your brain has about 86 billion neurons that
are interconnected at a hundred trillion to
a quadrillion synapses.
When you’re thinking, your neurons are shooting
messages back and forth across your brain…
the cells are “firing.”
And because someone could jump out and scare
you at any time, they have to be ready to
fire at a moment’s notice.
One study found that the firing of neurons
uses about two thirds of your brain’s energy.
And now scientists have found out how brain
cells recharge and fire!
Turns out they operate much the same way your
muscle cells do when you’re exercising.
Both neurons and muscles need glucose, a simple
form of sugar, to function.
In order to get more glucose, they activate
a protein called Glut4 which lives inside
our cells.
As you start thinking hard, extra Glut4 moves
to the surface of the cell membranes.
As I understand it, the Glut4 is sort of like
a neuron is sticking little fishing nets into
the bloodstream to grab glucose.
Once the nets are out there, they just keep
grabbing more fuel allowing our brain cells
to burn the midnight oil.
Once it grabs onto the glucose, it can use
it to send messages and keep you thinking.
The common misconception that your neurons
are firing electricity from one cell to the
next is a bit misleading.
It’s not like the electricity in your home.
Instead, your brain’s electrical signals
come from charged molecules, called ions.
The charge propagates down the length of a
nerve cell membrane, like doing the wave at
a hockey game.
When it reaches the end of the cell, the electrical
signal is converted into a chemical signal.
The chemicals are collectively called neurotransmitters,
which allow the cells to talk to each other.
The neurotransmitters are stored in little
containers across the neuron called vesicles.
Neurons can have hundreds, to hundreds of
thousands, of vesicles… all to make sure
the messages it wants to send get out safely.
Okay, so, this is the cool part.
Once a neuron is ready to talk to it’s neighbor,
it releases an ion via these chemicals,* and
throws it into the synaptic gap -- the space
between neurons.
And then BAM.
The ion is grabbed by the next neuron in the
chain, and the game of brain telephone continues.
All of this activity is powered by a molecule
called Adenosine Triphosphate, or ATP, which
is generated by mitochondria, the powerhouse
of the cell.
And what does mitochondria burn?
GLUCOSE, baby.
So, Glut4 grabs some glucose, pulls it into
the cell, gives it to the mitochondria, which
converts it to ATP so that we can send charged
ions through neurotransmitters to the next
cell.
And this happens again and again and again.
It’s happening in your brain right now while
you’re watching this.
Or, if that’s confusing, just remember.
Our brain runs on basically sugar, just like
muscles.
And also like muscles, if you’re low on
sugar, it makes it hard for your brain to
work.
It seems like the optimal amount of sugar
for your brain is about 25 grams of glucose
floating in the bloodstream.
For scale, that’s about as much as you find
in a banana.
So if you’re ever in a fog, take a break,
have a bite, and let your thinky meat recover.
So more glucose doesn’t mean more better,
but what about electricity?
Would giving my brain a little jolt kick things
into overdrive?
Julia tackles that super insane idea here.
Have you noticed your brain runs differently
when you haven’t eaten?
I've definitely noticed this.
Let us know down in the comments, make sure
you subscribe for more and thanks for watching.